## Ethics and Ethical Dilemmas

Besides learning about computing, you will also be learning about the ethics
surrounding computing. As technology revolutionizes society, there are new
issues that require thoughtful responses. Sometimes, these issues take the
form of an ethical dilemma, where we have to make a decision that can impact
other peoples' lives. Ethics can help guide our decisions, to minimize harm
and liability. However, it is important to remember that there are rarely
objective, best answers to these dilemmas, the way there are in computing.

There are many ethical theories and philosophies, and this course does not
attempt to teach such a broad field. Instead, you are expected to research and
find philosophies that particularly resonate with you. You should then apply
these theories to make your own answers to the ethical dilemmas.

As a starting point, you can review these links with information about
different theories. You are encouraged to go beyond these resources and find
other well-established theories that can guide your decisions:

  * <https://www.jmu.edu/mc/Docs/131101%208KQ%20Handout%20Revision.pdf>[](https://www.jmu.edu/mc/Docs/131101%208KQ%20Handout%20Revision.pdf){: .external}
  * <http://www.acm.org/about-acm/acm-code-of-ethics-and-professional-conduct>[](http://www.acm.org/about-acm/acm-code-of-ethics-and-professional-conduct){: .external}
  * [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Ethical_theories](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Ethical_theories)

## Ethics Activities

To apply these theories, you will be presented with ethical dilemmas in the
form of a short scenario. You are expected to analyze the scenario, take a
stance, and argue for your choice. You will be graded according to the rubric.

Your response should be between 150 and 300 words. Conciseness (neither too
long or too short) is important in communicating with colleagues. Graders will
reject posts that fall outside of this range. Citations do not contribute to
the length of the post.

## Rubric

The following rubric is used to grade student submissions. Each element is
described in length after the table.

**Criteria**

|

**Missing**

|

**Inadequate**

|

**Adequate**

|

**Full Mark**  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
Summarize the situation

|

0

|

.7

|

.85

|

1  
  
Take a clear stance

|

0

|

.7

|

.85

|

1  
  
Write a coherent argument

|

0

|

.7

|

.85

|

1  
  
Reference an ethical theory or guideline

|

0

|

.7

|

.85

|

1  
  
Use proper spelling, grammar, and punctuation

|

0

|

.7

|

.85

|

1  
  
**Summarize the Situation:** Summarization accurately captures the most important point or points about the situation to clearly lay out the impacts of the ethical issues on society. Stakeholders should be as general as possible, rather than being overly specific. Impacts should describe new powers, costs, or benefits.

  * _Inadequate_: At least one stakeholder is described, with or without reference to the impact on their lives.
  * _Adequate_: Multiple general stakeholders are described, but without explanation of the impact of this scenario on the stakeholders.
  * _Full marks_: Characterized by a deeper analysis that captures multiple, general stakeholders and the impacts on their lives.

**Take a Clear Stance: ** The stance is clearly identified. Depending on the type of ethical situation, this could involve either disagreement or agreement with a decision, or a recommendation for outcomes or actions.

  * _Inadequate_: A brief, unelaborated stance is given, without a recommendation.
  * _Adequate_: A stance is given, with a vague recommendation for the stakeholders in general.
  * _Full marks_: A clear stance is given, with useful recommendations for each of the given stakeholders.

**Write a Coherent Argument:** The argument should be logically and clearly laid out, without unwarranted conclusions.

  * _Inadequate_: An argument is given, but uses one or more logical fallacies ([reference](https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/659/03/)).
  * _Adequate_: An argument is given that is consistent and well-laid out, but without supporting evidence.
  * _Full marks_: A well-laid out, logical argument supporting the given stance is given, backed by compelling, well-cited evidence.

**Reference an Ethical Theory or Guideline: ** An explicit, named reference to an ethical theory (e.g., Justice, Utilitarianism) or a guideline from a relevant, well-established computing organization (i.e. ACM or IEEE) is given as context for the argument, and described.

  * _Inadequate_: A theory or guideline is referenced.
  * _Adequate_: A theory or guideline is referenced and described, but the given description is not particularly explanatory.
  * _Full marks_: The theory or guideline is clearly referenced and is described in a way that makes the scope and usefulness of the theory clear.

**Proper Grammar, Spelling, and Punctuation: ** No major grammar, spelling, or punctuation mistakes are made that impact the readability of the response.

  * _Missing_: The text is completely incoherent and unreadable.
  * _Inadequate_: Many major grammar, spelling, and punctuation mistakes are made that make it difficult to read the response.
  * _Adequate_: Few major grammar, spelling, or puncutation mistakes, but the text is written in an unprofessional style or tone.
  * _Full marks_: No noticeable grammar, spelling, or punctuation mistakes; text is written professionally.

## Example

The following example prompt is used to show examples of "Competent" and
"Above Competent" responses.

> Virginia Tech announced today that all undergraduate students are required
to buy and use VT-brand laptops. These new "HokieTops" come preinstalled with
software that allows the administration to monitor everyone's browsing and
desktop behavior. The administration hopes that the new oversight software
will prevent students from participating in undesirable activities such as
pirating content, cheating on exams, or facebooking too much.

Note that your response does not have to separate each rubric element into
their own paragraphs, although that may be easier to have it graded.

**Summarize the situation:**

  * _Inadequate:_ Students are now required to buy Virginia Tech laptops with monitoring software.
  * _Adequate: _Some stakeholders would include: students who have to have the laptops, parents who have to buy the laptops, and some computer building company that will need to build these laptops.
  * _Full marks_: In this ethical situation, various stakeholder have been affected: Students are now required to buy Virginia Tech laptops with monitoring software, which could spy on their browsing habits and invade their privacy. Parents and others supporting VT students have to have pay for this, which means an additional financial burden. The university must now store and keep safe all this data being collected about students, or they could harm students and be vulnerable to lawsuits.

**Take a clear stance:**

  * _Inadequate:_ I think that this new policy is unethical.
  * _Adequate_: This new policy is unethical, and people should fight back against it.
  * _Full marks:_ I think that this new policy violates students' personal rights and is unethical. People should refuse to pay for the laptops specified in this policy. Students should uninstall the software if possible. If the university moves forward with the policy regardless, they should be very careful about protecting students' right to privacy.

**Reference an ethical theory**

  * _Inadequate: _Students have a Right to privacy.
  * _Adequate_: Students have a Right to privacy, which is a theory that says people can't spy on you.
  * _Full marks:_ The ethical theory of Rights (_citation_) suggests that everyone has certain inalienable rights, such as being entitled to life, happiness, health, or privacy. This last right suggests that it is inherently wrong for people to spy or pry into someone's business without their consent.

**Write a coherent argument**

  * _Inadequate_: This new policy is bad because it violates students' right to privacy.
  * _Adequate_: According to the Rights theory, Virginia Tech students have a right to privacy and it is wrong to violate it. If students' data was being collected and was not private to only the students, then it would be very easy for people to target individual students
  * _Full marks:_ According to the Rights theory, Virginia Tech students have a right to privacy and it is wrong to violate that right. If students' data was being collected and was not private to only the students, then it would be very easy for people to target individual students. Even if the data is only meant to be analyzed by a computer, data breaches are very common nowadays even in universities, according to a report by the US Government (_citation_). Therefore, students cannot reasonably expect to have their privacy kept safe in this new policy.

**Proper Grammar, Spelling, and Punctuation:**

  * _Missing_: RightS THeory.
  * _Inadequate_: Theory of rights helpful, suggest people cannot spy on you.
  * _Adequate_: Yo, so this Right theory thing is pretty great, it says people can't spy on you right?
  * _Full marks_: The theory of Rights suggests that it is wrong for people to spy on others.